tato magadhabhūbhṛtā ciranirodhasaṃkleśitaṃ
śatāṣṭakayutāyutadvitayamīśa bhūmībhṛtām |
anāthaśaraṇāya te kamapi pūruṣaṃ prāhiṇo-
dayācata sa māgadhakṣapaṇameva kiṃ bhūyasā ||1||
tata: magadha-bhūbhṛtā	then by the Magadh king
cira-nirodha-saṃkleśitaṃ	for long detained (and so) tormented
śata-aṣṭaka-yuta-ayuta-dvitayam-	hundred eights along with ten thousand twice (20800)
īśa	O Lord!
bhūmībhṛtām	of kings
anātha-śaraṇāya te	for the helpless the only refuge, Thee
kam-api pūruṣam	some person
prāhiṇot-ayācata sa	sent prayed he
māgadha-kṣapaṇam-eva	Maagadha's (king of Magadha's) killing only
kim bhūyasā	why say much
O Lord! The Magadha king Jaraasandh had 20800 kings as captives in his prison. The tormented kings sent a person as a messenger to Thee, the only refuge of the helpless. He prayed to Thee to kill the king of Magadha. What more can be said.
yiyāsurabhimāgadhaṃ tadanu nāradodīritā-
dyudhiṣṭhiramakhodyamādubhayakāryaparyākula: |
viruddhajayino'dhvarādubhayasiddhirityuddhave
śaśaṃsuṣi nijai: samaṃ puramiyetha yaudhiṣṭhirīm ||2||
yiyāsu:-	desiring to attack
abhimāgadhaṃ	against the king of Magadha
tadanu nārada-udīritāt-	after that, by Naarada's saying
yudhiṣṭhira-makha-udyamāt-	Yudhishthiraa's sacrifice preparations
ubhaya-kārya-paryākula:	both the jobs priority (thinking)
viruddha-jayina:-adhvarāt-	enemies conquering and the sacrifice
ubhaya-siddhi:-iti-	both undertaken thus
uddhave śaśaṃsuṣi	by Udhdhava being advised
nijai: samaṃ	with Thy people
puram-iyetha	to the city went
yaudhiṣṭhirīm	of Yudhishthira
Then eager to attack Jaraasandha, the king of Magadha, Thou were informed by Naarada that Yudhishthira was preparing to perform the Raajasooya Yagna. Thou were in a fix as to which of the two Thou should attend to. Udhdhava pointed that the sacrifice demanded that all the enemies be conquered, so by attending the sacrifice both the purposes will be fulfilled. With Thy followers Thou proceeded to attend the Raajsooya Yagna in Yudhishthiraa's city Indraprastha.
aśeṣadayitāyute tvayi samāgate dharmajo
vijitya sahajairmahīṃ bhavadapāṅgasaṃvardhitai: |
śriyaṃ nirupamāṃ vahannahaha bhaktadāsāyitaṃ
bhavantamayi māgadhe prahitavān sabhīmārjunam ||3||
aśeṣa-dayitā-yute	all the wives along with
tvayi samāgate	Thou having reached
dharmaja: vijitya	Dharmaputra having conquered
sahajai:-mahīṃ	with the brothers the earth
bhavat-apāṅga-saṃvardhitai:	by Thy gracious glances (who had) grown in strength
śriyaṃ nirupamāṃ	wealth incomparable
vahan-ahaha	bearing, oh
bhakta-dāsāyitaṃ	of the devotees, services meeting
bhavantam-ayi	Thee Oh Thou
māgadhe prahitavān	to Jaraasandh sent
sabhīma-arjunam	along with Bheem and Arjuna
Thou reached Indraprastha along with all Thy wives. Enhanced in strength by Thy gracious glances, Dharmaputra with his brothers conquered all the opponents and amassed incomparable wealth. Oh Thou who are the servant of Thy devotees was then sent by Yudhishthira to Jaraasandha along with Bheem and Arjuna.
girivrajapuraṃ gatāstadanu deva yūyaṃ trayo
yayāca samarotsavaṃ dvijamiṣeṇa taṃ māgadham |
apūrṇasukṛtaṃ tvamuṃ pavanajena saṃgrāmayan
nirīkṣya saha jiṣṇunā tvamapi rājayuddhvā sthita: ||4||
girivrajapuraṃ	to the city of Girivraja
gatā:-tadanu	went then
deva yūyaṃ traya:	O Lord Thou three
yayāca samara-utsavaṃ	asked for a duel festival
dvija-miṣeṇa	in a Braahmina's guise
taṃ māgadhaṃ	to that king of Magadha
apūrṇa-sukṛtaṃ	short of good deeds
tu-amuṃ	indeed him
pavanajena saṃgrāmayan	with Bheem making him fight
nirīkṣya saha jiṣṇunā	seeing with Arjuna
tvam-api	Thou also
rāja-yuddhvā sthita:	as making two kings fight remained
O Lord! Thou three then went to Girivraja the capital of Jaraasandha. In the guise of Braahmins Thou asked for a festival of dual. Thou made the king of Magadha, Jaraasandha, who was lacking in good deeds, fight with Bheem. Meanwhile, Thou and Arjuna remained as onlookers and 'Raajayudhva' i.e. who make kings fight.
aśāntasamaroddhataṃ biṭapapāṭanāsaṃjñayā
nipātya jararassutaṃ pavanajena niṣpāṭitam |
vimucya nṛpatīn mudā samanugṛhya bhaktiṃ parāṃ
dideśitha gataspṛhānapi ca dharmaguptyai bhuva: ||5||
aśānt-samara-uddhataṃ	in the fierce fight (who had become) arrogant
viṭapa-pāṭanā-saṃjñayā	twig splitting hinting at
nipātya jarasa:-sutaṃ	felling down Jaraa's son (Jaraasandh)
pavanajena niṣpāṭitam	by Bheem was split up
vimucya nṛpatīn	releasing the kings
mudā samanugṛhya	happily blessing them
parāṃ bhaktiṃ dideśitha	supreme devotion gave
gata: spṛhān-api	(who had) overcome all desires even
ca dharma-guptai bhuva:	and for ethically ruling the earth
Arrogant Jaraasandha was fighting ferociously in the battle. Thou gave a hint to Bheema (that Jaraa's son could be killed by splitting) by splitting a twig. Bheema then tore Jaraasandha apart and killed him. The captive kings were then released and Thou happily blessed them with supreme devotion. They were all devoid of all desire, yet Thou engaged them to rule the earth ethically and as per Dharma.
pracakruṣi yudhiṣṭhire tadanu rājasūyādhvaraṃ
prasannabhṛtakībhavatsakalarājakavyākulam |
tvamapyayi jagatpate dvijapadāvanejādikaṃ
cakartha kimu kathyate nṛpavarasya bhāgyonnati: ||6||
pracakruṣi	when performing
yudhiṣṭhire	Yudhishthira
tadanu	then
rājasūya-adhvaraṃ	the Raajasooya Yagna
prasanna-bhṛtakī-bhavat-	happily as servants becoming all the kings
sakala-rājaka-vyākulam	all the kings
vyakulam-tvam-api-	eagerly Thou also
ayi jagatpate	O Thou Lord of the world!
dvija-pada-avaneja-	Braahmina's feet washing
ādikaṃ cakartha	etc performed
kimu kathyate	what can be said
nṛpa-varasya	of the great king's
bhāgya-unnati:	fortune upliftment
Yudhishthira was then performing the Raajsooya Yagna during which all the kings were joyfully performing the work allotted to them as servants. Thou O Lord of the Universe! Also were engaged in washing the feet of the holy men and the Braahmins etc. What can be said about the upliftment of the good fortune of the great king Yudhishthira?
tata: savanakarmaṇi pravaramagryapūjāvidhiṃ
vicārya sahadevavāganugata: sa dharmātmaja: |
vyadhatta bhavate mudā sadasi viśvabhūtātmane
tadā sasuramānuṣaṃ bhuvanameva tṛptiṃ dadhau ||7||
tata: savana-karmaṇi	then in the sacrificial rite
pravararm-agrya-pūjā-vidhiṃ	the important person's worship system
vicārya	foremost considering
sahadeva-vāk-anugata:	Sahadeva's advice following
sa dharmātmaja:	that Dharmaputra Yudhishthira
vyadhatta bhavate	performed to Thee
mudā sadasi	in the delighted assembly
viśvabhūtātmane	to Thee, the Soul of the whole Universe
tadā sa-sura-mānuṣaṃ	then along with the gods and humans
bhuvanam-eva	the entire universe
tṛptim dadhau	satisfaction gave
According to the system of the sacrificial rite the most noteworthy of the guests assembled was honoured and worshipped foremost. While Yudhishthira was considering, he followed Sahadeva's advice and performed this worship to Thee, the Soul of the whole Universe. This gave great satisfaction to everyone, gods and humans alike.
tata: sapadi cedipo muninṛpeṣu tiṣṭhatsvaho
sabhājayati ko jaḍa: paśupadurdurūṭaṃ vaṭum |
iti tvayi sa durvacovitatimudvamannāsanā-
dudāpatadudāyudha: samapatannamuṃ pāṇḍavā: ||8||
tata: sapadi cedipa:	then at once, the king of Chedi
muni-nṛpeṣu	the sages and kings
tiṣṭhatsu-aho	being present, strangely
sabhā-jayati	the assembly is honouring
ka: jaḍa:	which fool
paśupa-durdurūṭaṃ vaṭum	a cowherd corrupt boy
iti tvayi sa	thus to Thee he
durvaca:-vitatam-	abusive words' string
udvaman-	spitting out
āsanāt-udāpatat-	from his seat sprang up
udāyudha:	flourishing weapons
samapatan-amuṃ	confronted him
pāṇḍavā:	the Pandavas
Just then, at once, the king of Chedi, sprang up from his seat hurling a string of abusive words to Thee, 'In this assembly, in the presence of great sages and kings, which fool is honouring this corrupt cowherd boy?' he exclaimed. Saying so he flourished his weapons and was soon confronted by the Paandavas.
nivārya nijapakṣagānabhimukhasyavidveṣiṇa-
stvameva jahṛṣe śiro danujadāriṇā svāriṇā |
janustritayalabdhayā satatacintayā śuddhadhī-
stvayā sa paramekatāmadhṛta yogināṃ durlabhām ||9||
nivārya nija-pakṣagān	deterring Thy allies
abhimukhasya vidveṣiṇa:-	confronting the adversary
tvam-eva jahṛṣe śira:	Thou alone cut off head
danuja-dāriṇā sva-ariṇā	the Asura's cutting Thy discus
janu:-tritaya-labdhayā	in births three gaining
satata-cintayā	constantly thinking (of Thee)
śuddha-dhī:-tvayā sa	purified minded with Thee he
para-ekatām-adhṛta	supreme union attained
yogināṃ durlabhām	to Yogis difficult to attain
Thou deterred Thy allies, the Pandavas and Thyself cut off the head of the advancing adversary with Thy discus which cuts the Asuras. Chedi had gained a purified mind through his three births (as Hiranyakashipu, Raavana and Shishupa),where he was constantly thinking of Thee. Thus he attained the supreme union with Thee which is not easily attained by the Yogis.
tata: sumahite tvayā kratuvare nirūḍhe jano
yayau jayati dharmajo jayati kṛṣṇa ityālapan|
khala: sa tu suyodhano dhutamanāssapatnaśriyā
mayārpitasabhāmukhe sthalajalabhramādabhramīt ||10||
tata: sumahite	then the great
tvayā kratuvare	by Thee the highest sacrifice
nirūḍhe jana:-yayau	being completed, people went away
jayati dharmaja:	victory to Dharmaputra
jayati kṛṣṇa	victory to Krishna
iti-ālapan	thus proclaiming
khala: sa tu	wicked he indeed
suyodhana dhutamanā:-	Duryodhana, jealous minded
sapatna-śriyā	by the enemy's prosperity
maya-arpita-sabhā-mukhe	by Maya built the assembly hall in front (of that)
sthala-jala-bhramāt-	floor and water mistaking (for each other)
abhramīt	was confused
Then the most holy and elaborate sacrifice, the Raajasooya Yagna being completed by Thee, the people returned loudly acclaiming Thee and Yudhishthira. The wicked Duryodhana's mind was full of jealousy at the sight of the enemy's prosperity. He was all the more confused when he mistook the floor for water and water for floor in front of the assembly hall which was built by the Asura's architect Maya, for the Pandavas.
tadā hasitamutthitaṃ drupadanandanābhīmayo-
rapāṅgakalayā vibho kimapi tāvadujjṛmbhayan |
dharābharanirākṛtau sapadi nāma bījaṃ vapan
janārdana marutpurīnilaya pāhi māmāmayāt ||11||
tadā hasitam-utthitaṃ	then the laughter which arose
drupadanandanā-bhīmayo:-	of Draupadi and Bheema
apāṅga-kalayā	by the corner of the eyes glancing
vibho kimapi tāvata-	O Lord! A little then
ujjṛmbhayan	encouraging
dadharā-bhara-nirākṛtau	the earth's burden to remove
sapadi nāma	immediately indeed
bījaṃ vapan	seed sowing
janārdana	O All pervading Lord!
marutpurīnilaya	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi mām-āmayāt	save me from ailments
O Lord! Then a loud laughter arose from Draupadi and Bheema instigated somewhat by Thy side long glances. O All pervading Lord! Immediately indeed the seed was sown by Thee to rid the earth of its burden. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me from my ailments.